modules/chapter2/pages/dynamic.adoc, before:

= Dynamic Plugins

This section briefly explains the rationale for dynamic plugins and how to enable or disable plugins in RHDH.

== Dynamic Plugins in RHDH

As you already learnt in the first introductory course in the learning path, RHDH, as a platform consists of a small modular core and an extensive set of plugins that provide most of the functionality. In the upstream *Backstage.io* platform, enabling a plugin means modifying the platform's source code to load a bunch of TypeScript/JavaScript, and other static files (HTML, CSS, images etc.). You then have to stop and restart the runtime to enable the plugin.

This approach of changing source code and restarting for enabling plugins will not work for RHDH, because you need to recompile the source code, build a new container image and then re-deploy the new container image. 

RedHat has introduced the concept of a *dynamic plugin* to overcome this hurdle. A set of curated plugins are pre-baked into the container image, but not enabled by default. The dynamic plugin framework is based on the Node.js Scalprum library (https://github.com/scalprum/scaffolding). To enable or disable a plugin, you edit the *app-config.yaml* or the RHDH Helm chart YAML values and turn plugins on or off. In this manner, RHDH allows you to control plugin lifecycle and configuration without recompiling or rebuilding container images.

RHDH is pre-loaded with a selection of dynamic plugins. Most of these dynamic plugins are disabled by default due to the need for mandatory configuration. For a complete list of dynamic plugins that are included, see the https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_developer_hub/1.0/html-single/administration_guide_for_red_hat_developer_hub/index#dynamic-plugins-matrix[dynamic plugins matrix] section in the `Administration guide for Red Hat Developer Hub`. 

NOTE: Red Hat fully supports certain plugins (Topology, Tekton, Quay), while others are community-supported projects.

== Enabling/Disabling Dynamic Plugins in RHDH

The dynamic plugin support is based on the https://github.com/backstage/backstage/tree/master/packages/backend-dynamic-feature-service[backend plugin manager] package, which is a service that scans a configured root directory (`dynamicPlugins.rootDirectory` in the *app-config.yaml*) for dynamic plugin packages, and loads them dynamically.

You can include a dynamic plugin in RHDH by appending an entry to the `global.dynamic.plugins` list in your Helm Chart. 

In your Helm Chart `Form View`, you can add or remove plugins. Expand `Root Schema > global > Dynamic plugins configuration > List of dynamic plugins that should be installed...`, and then add the plugin path to the `Package specification of the dynamic plugin to install` field.

Consult the dynamic plugin matrix table in the administration guide for the path to the dynamic module and add the path to the list. You can enable or disable plugins from this view. For example, to enable the `GitHub Organization` plugin:

image::enable-plugins-form-view.png[title=Enabling Plugins using Helm Chart Form View]

If you prefer to edit the helm chart's YAML directly, do the following:

```yaml
global:
  dynamic:
    includes:
      - dynamic-plugins.default.yaml
    plugins:
      - disabled: false <1>
        package: >- <2>
          ./dynamic-plugins/dist/backstage-plugin-catalog-backend-module-github-org-dynamic
      - disabled: false <1>
        package: >- <2>
          ./dynamic-plugins/dist/backstage-plugin-catalog-backend-module-github-dynamic
```

<1> Enable or Disable the plugin. Set to `true` to disable the plugin
<2> The path to the dynamic plugin. Consult the `Administration Guide` (dynamic plugins matrix) for the full path

WARNING: Simply enabling a dynamic plugin in the helm chart may not provide the required functionality. You may need to edit your *app-config.yaml* files to add plugin-specific configuration (for example, set different environment variables) to make the plugin work correctly. Consult the corresponding plugin documentation for the required configuration.

If you wish to include a dynamic plugin that is not included in RHDH, or if you wish to develop your own custom plugins, consult the Janus IDP plugins repository at https://github.com/janus-idp/backstage-plugins. 

A nice demonstration on how to create a custom plugin for RHDH is shown https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yVzjTU3JamE[here]. You can host custom plugins in your own NPM registry and include them by following the steps at https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_developer_hub/1.0/html-single/administration_guide_for_red_hat_developer_hub/index#examples

== References

* https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_developer_hub/1.0/html-single/release_notes_for_red_hat_developer_hub_1.0/index#plugins-available-in-red-hat-developer-hub[Plugins available in RHDH 1.0]
* https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_developer_hub/1.0/html-single/administration_guide_for_red_hat_developer_hub/index#rhdh-installing-dynamic-plugins[Enabling Dynamic Plugins in RHDH]

Commit message:

updates for RHDH 1.2, kube plugin and topology plugin

modules/chapter2/pages/dynamic.adoc, after:

= Dynamic Plugins

This section briefly explains the rationale for dynamic plugins and how to enable or disable plugins in RHDH.

== Dynamic Plugins in RHDH

As you already learnt in the first introductory course in the learning path, RHDH, as a platform consists of a small modular core and an extensive set of plugins that provide most of the functionality. In the upstream *Backstage.io* platform, enabling a plugin means modifying the platform's source code to load a bunch of TypeScript/JavaScript, and other static files (HTML, CSS, images etc.). You then have to stop and restart the runtime to enable the plugin.

This approach of changing source code and restarting for enabling plugins will not work for RHDH, because you need to recompile the source code, build a new container image and then re-deploy the new container image. 

RedHat has introduced the concept of a *dynamic plugin* to overcome this hurdle. A set of curated plugins are pre-baked into the container image, but not enabled by default. The dynamic plugin framework is based on the Node.js Scalprum library (https://github.com/scalprum/scaffolding). To enable or disable a plugin, you edit the *app-config.yaml* or the RHDH Helm chart YAML values and turn plugins on or off. In this manner, RHDH allows you to control plugin lifecycle and configuration without recompiling or rebuilding container images.

RHDH is pre-loaded with a selection of dynamic plugins. Most of these dynamic plugins are disabled by default due to the need for mandatory configuration. For a complete list of dynamic plugins that are included, see the https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_developer_hub/1.2/html-single/configuring_plugins_in_red_hat_developer_hub/index#rhdh-supported-plugins[dynamic plugins matrix] section in the `Administration guide for Red Hat Developer Hub`. 

NOTE: Red Hat fully supports certain plugins (Topology, Tekton, Quay), while others are community-supported projects.

== Enabling/Disabling Dynamic Plugins in RHDH

The dynamic plugin support is based on the https://github.com/backstage/backstage/tree/master/packages/backend-dynamic-feature-service[backend plugin manager] package, which is a service that scans a configured root directory (`dynamicPlugins.rootDirectory` in the *app-config.yaml*) for dynamic plugin packages, and loads them dynamically.

=== Helm Charts

You can include a dynamic plugin in RHDH by appending an entry to the `global.dynamic.plugins` list in your Helm Chart. 

In your Helm Chart `Form View`, you can add or remove plugins. Expand `Root Schema > global > Dynamic plugins configuration > List of dynamic plugins that should be installed...`, and then add the plugin path to the `Package specification of the dynamic plugin to install` field.

Consult the dynamic plugin matrix table in the administration guide for the path to the dynamic module and add the path to the list. You can enable or disable plugins from this view. For example, to enable the `GitHub Organization` plugin:

image::enable-plugins-form-view.png[title=Enabling Plugins using Helm Chart Form View]

If you prefer to edit the helm chart's YAML directly, do the following:

```yaml
global:
  dynamic:
    includes:
      - dynamic-plugins.default.yaml
    plugins:
      - disabled: false <1>
        package: >- <2>
          ./dynamic-plugins/dist/backstage-plugin-catalog-backend-module-github-org-dynamic
      - disabled: false <1>
        package: >- <2>
          ./dynamic-plugins/dist/backstage-plugin-catalog-backend-module-github-dynamic
```

<1> Enable or Disable the plugin. Set to `true` to disable the plugin
<2> The path to the dynamic plugin. Consult the `Administration Guide` (dynamic plugins matrix) for the full path

WARNING: Simply enabling a dynamic plugin in the helm chart may not provide the required functionality. You may need to edit your *app-config.yaml* files to add plugin-specific configuration (for example, set different environment variables) to make the plugin work correctly. Consult the corresponding plugin documentation for the required configuration.

=== RHDH Operator

If you installed RHDH using the operator, enable or disable dynamic plugins in the `dynamic-plugins-rhdh-local` ConfigMap and restarting the RHDH pod. The YAML snippet shown for the helm chart based installation is also valid for the operator based installs. The plugin configuration in the *app-config-rhdh* ConfigMap remains the same.

If you wish to include a dynamic plugin that is not included in RHDH, or if you wish to develop your own custom plugins, consult the Janus IDP plugins repository at https://github.com/janus-idp/backstage-plugins. 

A nice demonstration on how to create a custom plugin for RHDH is shown https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yVzjTU3JamE[here^]. You can also host custom plugins in your own NPM registry and include them by following the steps at https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_developer_hub/1.2/html-single/configuring_plugins_in_red_hat_developer_hub/index#ref-example-dynamic-plugin-helm-installations[here^]

== References

* https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_developer_hub/1.2/html-single/configuring_plugins_in_red_hat_developer_hub/index#rhdh-supported-plugins[Plugins available in RHDH 1.2^]
* https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_developer_hub/1.2/html-single/configuring_plugins_in_red_hat_developer_hub/index[Configuring Dynamic Plugins in RHDH^]
