modules/chapter2/pages/pipelines.adoc, before:

= Tekton Plugin

The RHDH Tekton plugin provides a quick, read-only visualization of your Tekton continuous integration (CI) pipelines and task runs in the RHDH web UI. This allows developers to get quick feedback about their CI builds and status without ever leaving the RHDH web UI. The plugin displays the latest status of pipeline runs and the status of the tasks in the pipelines. Developers can easily identify tasks that failed and take quick, remedial action.

== Lab: Configuring the Tekton Plugin

=== Pre-requisites

* Install the `Red Hat OpenShift Pipelines` operator by following the official product documentation at https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openshift_pipelines/1.14/html-single/installing_and_configuring/index#op-installing-pipelines-operator-in-web-console_installing-pipelines

* (optional) Download the Tekton CLI (`tkn`) for your platform from https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/pipelines/latest. This will come in handy when troubleshooting and debugging pipeline runs.

* You must have enabled and configured the Kubernetes plugin for RHDH as per the instructions in the xref:topology.adoc[Kubernetes and Topology Plugin] section. The Kubernetes plugin must be made aware of the `pipelineruns` and `taskruns` custom resources in the `tekton.dev` group for the Tekton plugin to get data from pipeline runs. You must also ensure that the `ClusterRole` for the `default` service account has read-only access to these custom resources.

=== Steps

. Log in to the OpenShift cluster as the cluster administrator using the `oc` CLI.

. Download and inspect the sample Tekton CI pipeline at https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/devhub-qc-apps/blob/main/ci-cd/pipeline.yaml. For simplicity sake, the pipeline consists of 4 tasks that each print a message to the console. You can use much more complex pipelines with more realistic workflows if you wish.

. Create the pipeline in the `myapps` namespace.

  $ oc apply -f pipeline.yaml -n myapps

. Typically, pipelines are triggered by a Git repository commit, but for the purposes of this lab, we can launch the pipeline using the `oc` CLI and YAML files describing `Pipeline` run resources. Inspect the https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/devhub-qc-apps/blob/main/ci-cd/run-ok.yaml and https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/devhub-qc-apps/blob/main/ci-cd/run-ok.yaml file. These simulate a successful and failed pipeline run respectively.

. Start the pipeline runs

  $ oc apply -f run-ok.yaml
  $ oc apply -f run-fail.yaml

. Upgrade the RHDH helm chart in YAML mode and enable the Tekton plugins:
+
```yaml
  - disabled: false
    package: ./dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-tekton
```

. Click `Upgrade` to re-deploy the chart and for the new configuration to take effect. Wait until the RHDH container is fully up and running.

. Finally, inspect the catalog YAML descriptor file for this component at https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/devhub-qc-apps/blob/main/ci-cd/catalog-info.yaml. Adjust the values for your environment. Note the `janus-idp.io/tekton` annotation to match the name of the pipeline resource (`mypipeline`), plus label selector for the pipeline.
+
```yaml
apiVersion: backstage.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: mypipeline
  title: A Simple Tekton Pipeline
  description: |
    This is a simple Tekton Pipeline
  annotations:
    backstage.io/kubernetes-id: 'mypipeline'
    backstage.io/kubernetes-namespace: myapps
    backstage.io/kubernetes-label-selector: 'app=mypipeline'
    janus-idp.io/tekton : mypipeline
spec:
  type: pipeline
...
```

. Import the component into the RHDH catalog from the `Create > REGISTER EXISTING COMPONENT` page, and provide the full path to the `catalog-info.yml` file from the previous step. After the component is imported, verify that the component is listed in the `Catalog` page and click on `A Simple Tekton Pipeline` to view the component details.

. Verify that you can see a new tab named `CI` in the component details page. You should see the result of the two pipeline runs. 
+
image::pipeline-runs.png[Pipeline Runs]

. Mouse over the `TASK STATUS` column and you should see a high level summary of the tasks (how many passed, failed, or skipped).
+
image::task-status.png[Task Status]

. You can expand each of the pipeline runs (by expanding the greater than symbol to left of the pipelinerun name) and view the detailed status. Note that the `tests` task has failed in the `run-fail` pipeline run.
+
image::expand-pipeline-runs.png[Pipeline Run Details]

. Click on the failed `tests` task in the `run-fail` pipeline run to view the logs. In an actual application, you will see the unit test failure stack trace and other logs. In this case, the task simply prints a message.
+
image::failed-task.png[Failed Task Log]

== References

* https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_plug-ins_for_backstage/2.0/html-single/tekton_plugin_for_backstage/index[Tekton plugin for Backstage]

Commit message:

some more narrative details about tekton plugin

modules/chapter2/pages/pipelines.adoc, after:

= Tekton Plugin

The RHDH Tekton plugin provides a quick, read-only visualization of your Tekton continuous integration (CI) pipelines and task runs in the RHDH web UI. This allows developers to get quick feedback about their CI builds and status without ever leaving the RHDH web UI. The plugin displays the latest status of pipeline runs and the status of the tasks in the pipelines. Developers can easily identify tasks that failed and take quick, remedial action.

The Tekton depends on the Kubernetes plugin for set up and configuration. You must ensure that the Kubernetes plugin is aware of custom resources specific to Tekton (pipeline runs and task runs), and has read-only permissions to fetch information from the Kubernetes API server.

You must also ensure that you have a `janus-idp.io/tekton` annotation in your catalog YAML descriptor files that match the name of the pipeline resource. You can, as usual, use label selectors to query pipeline resources (`Pipelinerun` and `Taskrun` resources inherit labels from their parent `Pipeline`).

== Lab: Configuring the Tekton Plugin

=== Pre-requisites

* Install the `Red Hat OpenShift Pipelines` operator by following the official product documentation at https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openshift_pipelines/1.14/html-single/installing_and_configuring/index#op-installing-pipelines-operator-in-web-console_installing-pipelines

* (optional) Download the Tekton CLI (`tkn`) for your platform from https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/pipelines/latest. This will come in handy when troubleshooting and debugging pipeline runs.

* You must have enabled and configured the Kubernetes plugin for RHDH as per the instructions in the xref:topology.adoc[Kubernetes and Topology Plugin] section. The Kubernetes plugin must be made aware of the `pipelineruns` and `taskruns` custom resources in the `tekton.dev` group for the Tekton plugin to get data from pipeline runs. You must also ensure that the `ClusterRole` for the `default` service account has read-only access to these custom resources.

=== Steps

. Log in to the OpenShift cluster as the cluster administrator using the `oc` CLI.

. Download and inspect the sample Tekton CI pipeline at https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/devhub-qc-apps/blob/main/ci-cd/pipeline.yaml. For simplicity sake, the pipeline consists of 4 tasks that each print a message to the console. You can use much more complex pipelines with more realistic workflows if you wish.

. Create the pipeline in the `myapps` namespace.

  $ oc apply -f pipeline.yaml -n myapps

. Typically, pipelines are triggered by a Git repository commit, but for the purposes of this lab, we can launch the pipeline using the `oc` CLI and YAML files describing `Pipeline` run resources. Inspect the https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/devhub-qc-apps/blob/main/ci-cd/run-ok.yaml and https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/devhub-qc-apps/blob/main/ci-cd/run-ok.yaml file. These simulate a successful and failed pipeline run respectively.

. Start the pipeline runs

  $ oc apply -f run-ok.yaml
  $ oc apply -f run-fail.yaml

. Upgrade the RHDH helm chart in YAML mode and enable the Tekton plugins:
+
```yaml
  - disabled: false
    package: ./dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-tekton
```

. Click `Upgrade` to re-deploy the chart and for the new configuration to take effect. Wait until the RHDH container is fully up and running.

. Finally, inspect the catalog YAML descriptor file for this component at https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/devhub-qc-apps/blob/main/ci-cd/catalog-info.yaml. Adjust the values for your environment. Note the `janus-idp.io/tekton` annotation to match the name of the pipeline resource (`mypipeline`), plus label selector for the pipeline.
+
```yaml
apiVersion: backstage.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: mypipeline
  title: A Simple Tekton Pipeline
  description: |
    This is a simple Tekton Pipeline
  annotations:
    backstage.io/kubernetes-id: 'mypipeline'
    backstage.io/kubernetes-namespace: myapps
    backstage.io/kubernetes-label-selector: 'app=mypipeline'
    janus-idp.io/tekton : mypipeline
spec:
  type: pipeline
...
```

. Import the component into the RHDH catalog from the `Create > REGISTER EXISTING COMPONENT` page, and provide the full path to the `catalog-info.yml` file from the previous step. After the component is imported, verify that the component is listed in the `Catalog` page and click on `A Simple Tekton Pipeline` to view the component details.

. Verify that you can see a new tab named `CI` in the component details page. You should see the result of the two pipeline runs. 
+
image::pipeline-runs.png[Pipeline Runs]

. Mouse over the `TASK STATUS` column and you should see a high level summary of the tasks (how many passed, failed, or skipped).
+
image::task-status.png[Task Status]

. You can expand each of the pipeline runs (by expanding the greater than symbol to left of the pipelinerun name) and view the detailed status. Note that the `tests` task has failed in the `run-fail` pipeline run.
+
image::expand-pipeline-runs.png[Pipeline Run Details]

. Click on the failed `tests` task in the `run-fail` pipeline run to view the logs. In an actual application, you will see the unit test failure stack trace and other logs. In this case, the task simply prints a message.
+
image::failed-task.png[Failed Task Log]

== References

* https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_plug-ins_for_backstage/2.0/html-single/tekton_plugin_for_backstage/index[Tekton plugin for Backstage]
