modules/chapter2/pages/quay.adoc, before:

= Quay Plugin

The Quay plugin displays information about your container images (in a Quay registry) in the RHDH portal.

The process to enable and configure the Quay plugin consists of two major steps:

. Configure a proxy endpoint in `app-config.yaml`
. Enable the Quay dynamic plugin in your helm chart YAML values file

== Configure a Proxy Endpoint for Quay

RHDH comes with a generic `proxy` component that acts as a lightweight reverse proxy to make calls to external APIs and pass on the output to frontend plugins for visualization in the RHDH web UI. The Quay plugin supports both the public Quay.io container image registry, as well as self-hosted on-premise Quay enterprise versions.

In your `app-config.yaml` add a proxy endpoint for Quay:

```yaml
proxy:
      '/quay/api': <1>
        target: 'https://quay.io' <2>
        headers:
          X-Requested-With: 'XMLHttpRequest'
          Authorization: 'Bearer mytoken' <3>
        changeOrigin: true
        secure: true # false for self-signed certs in self-hosted versions of Quay
    quay:
      uiUrl: 'https://quay.io' <2>
```
<1> Proxy endpoint for the Quay front-end plugin
<2> Target - value should be `https://quay.io` for the public registry, or the full URL to your self-hosted Quay registry
<3> Authentication Token. Not needed for publicly available registries. Mandatory for private registries. You can generate tokens in the Quay.io `Account Settings > Generate Encrypted Password > `Encrypted Password` page.

== Enable the Quay Dynamic Plugin

Enable the Quay dynamic plugin in the RHDH helm chart Upgrade page (YAML view):

```yaml
- disabled: false
  package: ./dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-quay
```

== Lab: Enabling and Configuring the Quay Plugin

=== Pre-requisites

This hands-on lab uses a publicly available container registry that is freely accessible and hosted in the https://quay.io container registry.

* If you want to use a private container registry then you need to generate authentication tokens for your account on the https://quay.io website
* Consult the product documentation for Quay enterprise registry to install and set up account authentication.

=== Steps

In this lab, you will configure the Quay plugin to access the publicly accessible container registry for the `OpenShift OKD` project at https://quay.io/repository/openshift/okd.

. Edit the `app-config-rhdh` ConfigMap and add a proxy endpoint for Quay.io
+
```yaml
proxy:
      '/quay/api':
        target: 'https://quay.io'
        headers:
          X-Requested-With: 'XMLHttpRequest'
          #Authorization: 'Bearer mytoken' # for private registries only
        changeOrigin: true
        secure: true
    quay:
      uiUrl: 'https://quay.io'
```

. Enable the Quay dynamic plugin in the upgrade helm chart YAML view:
+
```yaml
- disabled: false
  package: ./dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-quay
```
+
Click `Upgrade` to re-deploy the helm chart. Wait until the RHDH container is fully restarted.

. Inspect the catalog YAML descriptor files at https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/devhub-qc-apps/blob/main/quay/quay-registry.yaml for an RHDH component that tracks the OpenShift OKD container registry. You need to add an annotation for the Quay plugin to fetch container image information from the appropriate registry.
+
```yaml
apiVersion: backstage.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata: <1>
  name: myquay
  title: Example Quay Registry
  description: |
    This is a simple Quay.io personal image registry example website
  links:
    - title: My Quay
      url: https://quay.io
  annotations:
    quay.io/repository-slug: openshift/okd <2>
spec:
...
```
+
<1> Metadata for this component - name, description and links to the public quay.io registry
<2> Annotation to identify the registry from which container image metadata needs to be fetched. In this case the `OKD` project registry. If you have a private registry with your own organization, then change this slug to reflect the path to your registry. The same path information applies to privately hosted Quay enterprise registries.

. Import this component into RHDH using the `Create > REGISTER EXISTING COMPONENT` page. Once imported, click the `Example Quay Registry` item on the RHDH Catalog page

. Observe that a new tab named `IMAGE REGISTRY` is visible. Click on this tab to view the information for container images contained in the `openshift/okd` registry
+
image::okd-images.png[title=Container images in Quay.io OKD registry]

. Click on any of the links in the `SECURITY SCAN` columns to view vulnerability information for the image. You can search and filter results in this view.
+
image::okd-vuln.png[title=Vulnerability info for images]

== References

* https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_plug-ins_for_backstage/2.0/html-single/quay_plugin_for_backstage/index[Quay Plugin for Backstage]
* https://github.com/janus-idp/backstage-plugins/tree/main/plugins/quay[Configure Quay Plugin]

Commit message:

ch2 change - updates for RHDH 1.2 (#19)
* updates for RHDH 1.2, kube plugin and topology plugin

* updates for RHDH 1.2, plugins sections for argo, tekton, kube and topology

modules/chapter2/pages/quay.adoc, after:

= Quay Plugin

The Quay plugin displays information about your container images (in a Quay registry) in the RHDH portal.

The process to enable and configure the Quay plugin consists of two major steps:

. Configure a proxy endpoint in `app-config.yaml`
. Enable the Quay dynamic plugin for your instance

== Configure a Proxy Endpoint for Quay

RHDH comes with a generic `proxy` component that acts as a lightweight reverse proxy to make calls to external APIs and pass on the output to frontend plugins for visualization in the RHDH web UI. The Quay plugin supports both the public Quay.io container image registry, as well as self-hosted on-premise Quay enterprise versions.

In your `app-config.yaml` add a proxy endpoint for Quay:

```yaml
proxy:
      '/quay/api': <1>
        target: 'https://quay.io' <2>
        headers:
          X-Requested-With: 'XMLHttpRequest'
          Authorization: 'Bearer mytoken' <3>
        changeOrigin: true
        secure: true # false for self-signed certs in self-hosted versions of Quay
    quay:
      uiUrl: 'https://quay.io' <2>
```
<1> Proxy endpoint for the Quay front-end plugin
<2> Target - value should be `https://quay.io` for the public registry, or the full URL to your self-hosted Quay registry
<3> Authentication Token. Not needed for publicly available registries. Mandatory for private registries. You can generate tokens in the Quay.io `Account Settings > Generate Encrypted Password > `Encrypted Password` page.

== Enable the Quay Dynamic Plugin

Enable the Quay dynamic plugin in the dynamic plugins YAML configuration:

```yaml
  - package: ./dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-quay
    disabled: false
```

== Lab: Enabling and Configuring the Quay Plugin

=== Pre-requisites

This hands-on lab uses a publicly available container registry that is freely accessible and hosted in the https://quay.io container registry.

* If you want to use a private container registry then you need to generate authentication tokens for your account on the https://quay.io website
* Consult the product documentation for Quay enterprise registry to install and set up account authentication.

=== Steps

In this lab, you will configure the Quay plugin to access the publicly accessible container registry for the `OpenShift OKD` project at https://quay.io/repository/openshift/okd.

. Edit the `app-config-rhdh` ConfigMap and add a `proxy` endpoint for Quay.io at the same indentation level as the `app` and `kubernetes` attributes:
+
```yaml
proxy:
      '/quay/api':
        target: 'https://quay.io'
        headers:
          X-Requested-With: 'XMLHttpRequest'
          #Authorization: 'Bearer mytoken' # for private registries only
        changeOrigin: true
        secure: true
    quay:
      uiUrl: 'https://quay.io'
```

. Enable the Quay dynamic plugin in the `dynamic-plugins-rhdh-local` ConfigMap:
+
```yaml
- package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-quay'
  disabled: false
```
+
Restart the RHDH pod from the `Topology` view. Wait until the RHDH pod is fully restarted.

. Inspect the catalog YAML descriptor files at https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/devhub-qc-apps/blob/main/quay/quay-registry.yaml for an RHDH component that tracks the OpenShift OKD container registry. You need to add an annotation for the Quay plugin to fetch container image information from the appropriate registry.
+
```yaml
apiVersion: backstage.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata: <1>
  name: myquay
  title: Example Quay Registry
  description: |
    This is a simple Quay.io personal image registry example website
  links:
    - title: My Quay
      url: https://quay.io
  annotations:
    quay.io/repository-slug: openshift/okd <2>
spec:
...
```
+
<1> Metadata for this component - name, description and links to the public quay.io registry
<2> Annotation to identify the registry from which container image metadata needs to be fetched. In this case the `OKD` project registry. If you have a private registry with your own organization, then change this slug to reflect the path to your registry. The same path information applies to privately hosted Quay enterprise registries.

. Import this component into RHDH using the `Create > Register Existing Component` page. Once imported, click the `Example Quay Registry` item on the RHDH Catalog page

. Observe that a new tab named `Image Registry` is visible. Click on this tab to view the information for container images contained in the `openshift/okd` registry
+
image::okd-images.png[title=Container images in Quay.io OKD registry]

. Click on any of the links in the `Security Scan` columns to view vulnerability information for the image. You can search and filter results in this view.
+
image::okd-vuln.png[title=Vulnerability info for images]

== References

* https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_plug-ins_for_backstage/2.0/html-single/quay_plugin_for_backstage/index[Quay Plugin for Backstage]
* https://github.com/janus-idp/backstage-plugins/tree/main/plugins/quay[Configure Quay Plugin]
